@oganm @emmagraham @saramostafavi @janstett

Proposal

Motivation and Background work
Our final project will involve RNA-Seq data from the Peter Stirling lab (Focus on genomic instability and cancer). Yeast wild-type data will be compared to two different mutants in the yeast homolog of SF3B1 (splicing factor 3b subunit 1) called HsH155. SF3B1 is a component of several splicesomes and is important translational modification of proteins to ensure proper functionality. SF3B1 mutations have been detected in several cancers including breast, uveal melanoma and myeloid leukemias. Two loss of function mutations commonly seen in the HEAT repeat domains of cancer patients: K335N and P369E. These mutations can be modelled in a yeast system in HSH155 to understand the consequence of loss of splicesomal function. Specifically, we want to know how these splice mutants are implicated in gene expression and intron retention rate and how this may induce a cancerous phenotype. SF3B1 is the most mutated gene in myeloid maligancies and is indicative of better overal survival compared to wildtype counterparts. However, SF3B1 is a poor prognostic indicator in progesterone receptor-negative breast cancer. This comparison highlights the gap in our understanding of SF3B1 mutation. 

Division of labour

Dataset
RNA was extracted from Saccharomyces cerevisiae using the RiboPure RNA purification kit for Yeast. Steps were performed as per the manufacturer's instructions along with an additional DNase step for maximum purity. 9 samples in total - one wild type, one point mutant K335N, and another point mutant P369E (in triplicates) were sent to Genome Quebec Innovation Centre for sequencing. The library was prepared using Illumina TruSeq rRNA depleted stranded library prep. Based on a literature survey, rRNA depletion was chosen over PolyA since rRNA depletion protocols appear to measure immature transcripts (pre-mRNAs) and therefore provide more information on splicing patterns and possible splice junctions. Furthermore, since the main area of interest were rare splice variants, the strongest library prep method was chosen. Sequencing was performed by HiSeq 4000 Paired End 100bp sequencing lane yielding > 300M reads, ~25M reads per library.  

Aims and Methodology

Our final project will involve RNA-Seq data from the Peter Stirling lab (Focus on genomic instability and cancer). Yeast wild-type data will be compared to two different splice mutants, all previously collected in triplicate. The hypothesis is that there will be a change in the expression data between these splice mutants and the wild-type, specifically a change in the intron retention rate. Genes involved in splicing have many important roles such as modulating protein function and gene expression. Mutations in splicing have been linked to endocrine disorders, dementia and cancer. By disrupting the function of the splicing machinery and analyzing changes in expression, we can better understand the basic mechanisms of gene splicing and how it relates to pathology.

Please let me know if you require anymore information about our proposed project.
Group members: Me, @arunk95, and @lfourn13